This repository accompanies the paper Pilosof S, Alcalá-Corona SA, Wang T, Kim T, Maslov S. The network structure and eco-evolutionary dynamics of CRISPR-induced immune diversification. bioRxiv. 2020. Available: <https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/850800v1.abstract>. It contains the code and data for the simulation and empirical analysis included in the paper.

# Simulated data

## Simulations based on the Childs et. al. model

We implement a hybrid (deterministic/stochastic) model by [Childs, et. al. 2012](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1558-5646.2012.01595.x). The C++ source code to make the simulations can be found in the folder `SourceCodeSimulatior`.

### Compilation

The code is written in C++ (version 11). It should be compiled using the command line with an appropriate C++11 compiler. For example:

```C++
g++ -std=c++11 CRISPR_Model.cpp -o CRISPRsimulator
```

### Running

Run the executable compiled code in the command line, using the next parameters:

```
./CRISPRsimulator Dp mu runT Pts Sp seed 
```

Where:
* `Dp`: The initial number of phage strains.
* `mu`: The prtospacer mutation rate per protospacer.
* `runT`: Specifies the running time-length (in model hours) for the simulation. This is the maximum length of each simulation. Execution time varies depending on the other parameters.
* `Pts`: The length of the protospacer cassette for virus strains.
* `Sp`: The length of the spacer cassette for host strains.
* `seed`: Set the seed for the random generator used for the stochastic part.

For example:
```
./CRISPRsimulator 1 1e-7 5000 15 10 12499
```

It is also possible to set the seed of each simulation using a random number generated by your Unix/Linux System. This is useful for running different simulations with the same set of parameters.

```
./CRISPRsimulator 1 1e-7 5000 15 10 $RANDOM
```

Notes:

* A full  description of the parameters is given in the original paper by [Childs, et. al. 2012](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1558-5646.2012.01595.x) and in our paper.
* The analysis can be computationally intensive and we ran it on the Midway HPC cluster at the University of Chicago.

### Output

The simulator produces the following files files named mu*M*_initialDiffDp*D*_S*X*P*Y*_R-*N*_*suffix*, where M is `mu`, *D* is `Dp`, *X* is `Sp`, *Y* is `Pts`, *N* is the seed number of a particular simulation and *suffix* is one of the following:

* `Bacteria-abundance.txt`: The density of bacteria at different times.
* `Phage-abundance.txt`: The density of viruses at different times.
* `Bacteria-TREE.txt`: Specifies the parents and children of bacteria. Converted to a nwk file in section `Trees` in file `simulations_analysis.R`.
* `data-bact.txt`: Spacer composition of bacteria strains at each time.
* `data-phage.txt`: Protospacer composition of virus strains at each time.

For example, our main simulation in the paper is mu1e-7_initialDiffDp1_S10P15_R-12499.

In this repository we include the output files of our main example in the paper in the folder `data\mu1e-7_initialDiffDp1_S10P15_R-12499`. We also include a list with all the seeds for the 100 simulations we ran in file `seed_index.csv`. Running the simulator with these seeds and same parameters as our main simulation will reproduce the exact data we use in the paper.

## Analysis of the simulation's output files

The simulator's output files are analyzed using the file `simulations_analysis.R`. We also include the file `host_spacer_simulation.Rmd` for specific analysis of modularity and phylogenetic distance in host-spacer and infection networks.

### Requirements

* The code is written in R and requires the packages specified in the code. Modularity analysis is performed with package [infomapecology](https://github.com/Ecological-Complexity-Lab/infomap_ecology_package). See instructions for installation there.
* The analysis is computationally intensive and we ran it on the Midway HPC cluster at the University of Chicago. Some adaptation of the R code will be necessary to adequate it to other HPC systems.
* The section *Set up* in file `simulations_analysis.R` includes code that may need to be adapted.

### Analysis breakdown

The R file `simulations_analysis.R` is divided into sections.

* **Set up**: The first line includes the parameter values used (Table is in the paper). Lines 11-24 are used when calling the file from an external sbatch file when running jobs on a HPC system.
* **Initialize**: Read simulation data and use it to define regimes. Also prepare the data frames.
* **Functions**: Define functions. The main function is `create_networks_hr`, which creates all the networks (Fig 2 in the paper).
* **bacteria / phage diversity**: Plot abundance profiles of hosts and viruses.
* **Generate networks**: Generate networks for each time.
* **Measures of diversity**: Calculate host, virus and spacer abundance and richness. Other indices of diversity can be included in this section.
* **Phage and bacteria diversification**: Calculate the persistence of hosts and viruses.
* **Trees**: Create the phylogenetic trees for hosts and viruses.
* **Modularity of infection networks**: Calculate the modularity of infection networks in time. If `make_plots` is TRUE then the code will produce additional plots (e.g., of the infection network per time step). This is good for exploratory analysis.
* **WNODF**: Calculate the WNDOF index for weighted nestedness in immunity networks at each time.
* **Spacer matches**: Calculate the proportion of spacer matches (the edge weights in immunity networks) at each time.
* **Extinctions**: Analyze order of virus extinction.
* **R calculations**: This calculates the epidemiological R quantities.
* **Plot**: Produce a PDF with all the plots for convenience.

The following sections are also used in file `host_spacer_simulation.Rmd`. The analysis in these sections serves for comparison to empirical data.

* **Significance of modularity of infection networks**: Calculate the significance of modularity at the end of each VDR by comparing to shuffled networks.
* **Phylogenetic signal in infection networks**: Is there a phylogenetic signal in infection networks at the end of each VDR?
* **Significance of modularity of host-spacer networks**: Aggregates host-spacer networks within each VDR and test if modularity is non-random compared to shuffled networks.
* **Phylogenetic signal in host-spacer modules**: Is there a phylogenetic signal in the host-spacer networks analyzed in the previous section?

# Empirical data

## Database

The data sets we use in the paper are stored in an SQL database `CRISPR_database_NEE.sqlite`.

## Analysis

Code is concentrated in file `empirical_data_analysis.R`. We also include `empirical_data_analysis.Rmd`, which sources the R file to create a markdown file for convenience. The main functions that perform the analysis are:

* **get_strain_spacers**: Obtains the spacer set of a virus or a host from the host-spacer/virus-protospacer matrix.
* **get_matches**: Match spacers and protospacers and produce an immunity network.
* **test_PD_modules**: the same function as in the simulated data, to test for phylogenetic signal.
* **calculate_ev_nestedness**: Calculate leading eigenvalue weighted nestedness (Staniczenko PPA, Kopp JC, Allesina S. The ghost of nestedness in ecological networks. Nat Commun. 2013;4: 1391.).
* **main**: A wrapper to read data, build and analyze immunity networks.

The analysis of modularity is also performed with infomapecology.


# Neutral model without explicit immunity

In the paper we mention a comparison to a system without specific immune memory (specific spacer-protospacer matches). This done using a mean-field simplification of the hybrid model that does not explicitly include the diversity of hosts and viruses. Instead, we consider the model as a Lotka-Volterra system with all the host strains considered as one single prey, and all the virus strains as a single predator. The immunity is taken as an average value of the matrix M. The Python code for that can be found in folder `MeanField-NeutralDynamics`. It is a simple ODE integrator of the LV mean-field simplified system, which uses different values of the average immunity matrix M.

## Running

```
python MFDyn_AverageImmMatrix.py M1 M2 M3 M4
```

Where M<sub>i</sub> are the artificial average values of the matrix M.

For example:
```
python MFDyn_AverageImmMatrix.py 0.35 0.7 0.85 0.9167
```
